<p> <em>[For submission to <a
    href="http://www9.org/w9-call-developer-extend.html">WWW9</a> Developer's
    Day XML track.]</em> 
</p>

Presentation title: Cross-platform XML-based Web Applications with the PIA

Presenter's name: Stephen Savitzky

Job title and affiliation: 
        Chief Software Scientist 
	Ricoh Silicon Valley, Inc.  Calif. Research Center
Address: 
	Stephen Savitzky
	Ricoh Silicon Valley, Inc. 
	2882 Sand Hill Rd. Suite 115
	Menlo Park, CA 94025
Email/Phone/Fax: <steve@rsv.ricoh.com>
	 voice: 650.496.5710  front desk: 650.496.5700  fax: 650.854.8740 

Abstract
 Developers face a maddeningly wide array of choices for creating web
 applications.  In addition to choosing an operating system and web server
 for deployment, most applications require choosing a database, development
 environment, scripting language(s), HTML standard, and whether to use
 Javascript or other client side components.  These choices have direct and,
 sometimes unintended, consequences for the long-term success of the
 application.  For example, a Javascript dependent site for stock trading
 might look great on Internet Explorer 5.0, but may be entirely inaccessible
 to the growing number of customers who have wireless Web access from a PDA.
 Even worse, compatibility issues may cause months of reengineering and cost
 a company their most precious commodity in this web world -- lead time.  As
 an example, Active Server Pages may make it easier to maintain an online
 catalog using a tool like Front Page, but may not run on the same
 operating system as the C based CGI scripts for tracking shopping carts and
 transactions.

 Despite the growing popularity of Apache, PHP, and other open source tools
 that operate on multiple platforms, the choices for web application design,
 development, and deployment continue to proliferate and diverge.  This
 presentation describes an approach to Web application development that
 minimizes platform dependencies and maximizes interoperability.  A somewhat
 unconventional use of XML plays a key role in this design: applications
 consist primarily "active" XML pages which use a vocabulary of
 domain-specific markup language tags.  The server interprets these tags to
 perform processing appropriate to the context, for example to insert the
 results of a database query or simplify the content for a text only client.

 Except for a few ``primitive'' tags, most tag definitions also consist
 entirely of XML.  Hence, only a single syntax is used for the entire
 application.  Moreover, the internal representation and programming model
 seen by the application is based on DOM parse trees, making it impossible
 for an application to send an ill-formed page to a client.

 The wide support for XML ensures that these applications can be developed
 and modified on virtually any existing platform.  To handle the remaining
 platform dependent issues, namely tag implementation and application
 configuration, the underlying processing engine is open source.  The PIA is
 a Java based web server and application framework in which tag actions can
 be implemented in Java and site configuration information is flexibly
 specified via XML documents.  The PIA provides a number of features which
 make it well-suited to prototyping and customizing web applications.

 These sorts of XML based web applications can be deployed on existing Web
 servers either by incorporating the PIA engine as a module (e.g. servlet),
 or by creating static versions of the pages with the appropriate
 substitutions.  As server engines provide more sophisticated native support
 for XML processing, applications developed using the PIA should enjoy true
 platform independence.
